---
layout: post
title: Dice Roll PMF
categories: [math]
comments: true
published: true
---

Random variables are functions that associate numbers with outcomes. Statistics textbooks tend to introduce random variables very poorly: usually a few examples are introduced conceptually, but the probability mass (or in some cases, density) functions that generate the outcomes that the random variables take on are often ignored.

An simple example I've encountered several times in textbooks is this: "X is a random variable that denotes the likelihood of getting a particular sum after rolling two six-sided dice. Do something mathy with X (paraphrase)." This random variable will usually be analyzed visually: a 6x6 grid is drawn, where the diagonals of equal sums show the relative frequencies of different sums. The longest diagonal (of 7's) goes from the top right to bottom left: there are six boxes in this diagonal, which indicates that the chances of rolling a 7 are 6/36 (or 1 in 6).

As a techie, this sort of visual explanation is deeply unsatisfying. Not only do textbooks never offer an explanation of the probability mass function that generates this random variable, a Google search failed to yield any interesting PMF's. So I decided to create one myself. Given a fair dice of 




The most relevant information in such outcomes is often the number of successes that occur, not a detailed listing of which trials ended in success and which ended in failure

a function that assigns numbers to outcomes is called a random vari- able


In an experiment a person may be chosen at random, and one random variable may be the person's height. Mathematically, the random variable is interpreted as a function which maps the person to the person's height. Associated with the random variable is a probability distribution that allows the computation of the probability that the height is in any subset of possible values, such as the probability that the height is between 180 and 190 cm, or the probability that the height is either less than 150 or more than 200 cm.

RANDOM VARIABLE
    X_height(Cameron) = 200
    X_height(Austin)  = 190
    X_height(Ellen)   = 160
    X_height(Eason)   = 200

    x is an element of X where x is from the set {200, 190, 160}

    Success/fails (binomial):
        X({S,F,F,F}) = 1
        X({F,S,F,F}) = 1
        X({S,S,F,F}) = 2
        X({F,F,F,F}) = 0

PROBABILITY MASS FUNCTION
    pmf(200) = 0.5
    pmf(190) = 0.25
    pmf(160) = 0.25

Regression equation
Khan academy ANOVA
Chi square dist
Learn vimscript
Vimtutor

GOALS:
    Fundamentals:
        - basic stats
        - basic linear algebra
        - basic information theory
        - basic machine learning (take Ng's class during Winter Break)
    Programming:
        - javascript (node.js, webpack, d3.js)
        - R
        - C++
    Data Science:
        - data pipelines
        - python packages
        - hadoop
